---
ID: 419
post_title: Executors 101
author: Jan Wilmans
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: http://nullptr.nl/2017/09/executors-101/
published: true
post_date: 2017-09-08 23:57:26
---
# Executors

So what are executors? Executors sit between **tasks** and their **execution-context**, the way iterators sit between **collections** and **algorithms**. Executors could potentially do many things, to name some:

*   parallelize tasks (over multiple cores for example) 
*   distribute tasks (over multiple machines or to gpu's for example)
*   sequentialize tasks (stitch tasks together over time)
*   prioritize tasks (scheduled tasks at a fixed time might trumpf a deferred task)

## My take on multi-threading

*   apply the Rule of of zero (mutexes)
*   apply the motto: there can be only one! (thread)

Basically, multi-threading 101 in a nutshell: if you can avoid it, do so.

## Why? you might ask.

Some attributes of multi-threaded code:

*   difficult to get right (write) 
*   difficult to understand (read) 
*   difficult to debug 
*   difficult to unittest

These are not good attributes for code to have in general. So is multi-threaded code evil ? No, not by itself, but given its attributes, its better to avoid it if possible. Are there scenarios where avoiding multi-threading is not possible, at first glance it would seem so when:

*   when interacting with/monitoring a component that does not support events
*   a system must remain responsive and execute long-lasting tasks at the same time

However, depending on how much control you have over the component, in both cases can be avoided. (todo: describe how..)

## concurrency vs parallelism

as defined by [Hartmut Kaiser][1]:

concurrency: more then one thread is operating on the same dataset

parallelism: threads that do work independently and on separate datasets

Unfinished... To be continued...

# References

*   Michal wong's slides [C++17: will it be great or just ok][2]
*   Talk on youtube [itCppCon17 - C++ executors to enable heterogeneous computing in tomorrow's C++ today (M. Wong)][3] skip to 0:55:00

 [1]: https://github.com/hkaiser
 [2]: https://github.com/italiancpp/itcppcon17/blob/master/Keynote%20C%2B%2B%20executors%20to%20enable%20heterogeneous%20computing%20in%20tomorrow's%20C%2B%2B%20today%20-%20Michael%20Wong.pdf
 [3]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Evz_J9nAL6Y