---
ID: 810
post_title: Guidelines for writing better code
author: Jan Wilmans
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: http://nullptr.nl/2018/02/good-code/
published: true
post_date: 2018-02-13 21:15:57
---
To start writing **better** code, we must define **good**. I define good code as:

*   correct (no undefined behaviour) 
*   easy to read/understand 
*   easy to change 
*   no surprises == good (aka low WTF occurrence)

I want to thank Gert-jan de Vos for inspiring me to internalizing many of the habits described here. Although this post will assume a C++ audience for examples, many of the principles are generically applicable.

Goals:

*   writing good code 
*   reducing the development cycle (design, write, test, repeat), the shorter the cycle the more effective the development process

> create methods

Seriously, not just for reuse, but most importantly for readability. For example, if you have a 10-step process, than maybe create a class, give it the name of the process and create 10 functions to express the steps. **rationale:** makes it easier to understand.

> do not repeat yourself

define types so they appear in one place and see 'create methods'. **rationale:** makes it easier to understand and change code.

> more explicit code is better (but don't repeat yourself ;p)

`**todo** needs example`

> returning a value should always be as simple as 'return value;'

This basically means: do not return values by causing side-effects. This includes writing to member variables or using 'out' variables. This allows **const** in many more places and prevents surprises. **rationale:** makes it easier to understand code.

> whenever possible: fail early **rationale:** makes it easier to understand code and shortens the development cycle.
> 
> prefer compile-time checks over run-time checks use static_assert when possible to check preconditions **rationale:** fail early
> 
> exit methods asap if preconditions are not met When compile time checking is not possible, still do the precondition check up front. write checks for error scenarios *before* happy flow code, so errors in these checks can be found in happy flow. **rationale:** fail early
> 
> use unique_ptr when possible and shared_ptr only when required If cyclical references are required consider giving ownership to a common parent and use raw pointers for the relations **rationale:** unique ownership is easier to reason about.
> 
> use references (or raw pointers) for passing to methods that do not take ownership **rationale:** ownership should be explicit so destruction order is well defined and understood.

Use references when possible and pointers only when required do not initialize references with unchecked pointers Rationale: references are initialized by nature, do not require null-checking and cannot be accidentally re-assigned. Make all destructors in an inheritance hierarchy virtual Rationale: makes sure the all destructors in the hierarchy are called Prefer type-safe methods over non-type-safe methods use std::iostream and std::stringstream instead of printf() and friends, maybe even offer: https://github.com/djeedjay/DebugViewPP/blob/master/include/CobaltFusion/stringbuilder.h prefer (inline) methods over macros Rationale: va_args lack type-safely and are error-prone Rationale: macros lack type-safetly and cannot be optimized as good as inline methods Use synchronous events when possible and asynchronous events only when required. If using asynchronous events, make sure to use a valued reply (send context data with the event). Rationale: A getter for context data on an asynchronous event is a race-condition by design. Carefully consider adding a new thread Rationale: most race-conditions/locking-problems can be solved be using *less* threads or by dispatching update tasks to a single update-thread.

Jan A) Not cleaning up resources in face of exceptions

Jan A1) This includes not using uniqe_ptr/make_unique and wrapping OS native handles in a specialized unique_ptr destructors, like for closing file handles GDI handles, etc.

Mottos:  do not repeat yourself, create methods  more explicit code is better; needs an example because its not always true; for example, when repeating type-defintions  design for debugging is a self-fulfilling prophecy  returning a value should always be as simple as 'return value;' Whenever possible: fail early! a) prefer compile-time checks over runtime checks b) exit methods asap if preconditions are not met c) write checks for error scenarios *before* happy flow code, so errors in these checks can be found in happy flow Rationale: the shorter the development cycle the move effecient the development process Use unique_ptr when possible and shared_ptr only when required  if cyclical references are required consider giving ownership to a common parent and use raw pointers for the relations  use references (or raw pointers) for passing to methods that do not take ownership Rationale: ownership should be explicit so destruction order is well defined and understood. Use references when possible and pointers only when required  do not initialize references with unchecked pointers Rationale: references are initialized by nature, do not require null-checking and cannot be accidentally re-assigned. Make all destructors in an inheritance hierarchy virtual Rationale: makes sure the all destructors in the hierarchy are called Prefer type-safe methods over non-type- safe methods a) use std::iostream and std::stringstream instead of printf() and friends, maybe even offer: https://github.com/djeedjay/DebugViewPP/blob/master/include/CobaltFusion/stringbuilder.h b) prefer (inline) methods over macros Rationale: va_args lack type-safely and are error-prone Rationale: macros lack type-safetly and cannot be optimized as good as inline methods Use synchronous events when possible and asynchronous events only when required. If using asynchronous events, make sure to use a valued reply (send context data with the event). Rationale: A getter for context data on an asynchronous event is a race-condition by design. Carefully consider adding a new thread Rationale: most race-conditions/locking- problems can be solved be using *less* threads or by dispatching update tasks to a single update-thread.

todo: - add a rationale for every rule - create a DOD (definition of done) for rules - must be unambiguous - must have a rationale - must be widely accepted as good practice? - todo, something about: - auto vs repeating type-definitions - && vs pass-by- value (std::string) - catch exceptions by const& (catching by value will cause slicing)

# Overuse of patterns

Ok, lets dig in, what problems do these patterns solve, below are suggestions/opinions, please disagree as needed:

## visitor -> isn't obsolete since std::function? (or type erasure in general)

## observer -> obsolete since boost::signal or alike

with obsolete I mean: these patterns are still very useful, but you probably don't want to handcode them anymore because there are time tested implementations.

## state pattern: don't roll you own. Use some model tool like dezyne (https://www.verum.com/dezyne/) to generate state machines and avoid all hand coded mistakes + gain some verification.

## Iterator: ok, it can be useful, but 90% of the time use std::vector, 5% use a different STL container, 5% roll you own if you must.

Things are of course dependent of your sector, if you are in gaming/low latency/embedded its not this easy.

## Adaptor/Proxy/Facade: real useful, but all the same to me, you want to hide/decouple/abstract something use only when needed.

## Abstract*/Factory* and specifically AbstractFactory: so rarely useful and to me often a sign of over engineering. Don't write code to be generic forever; write code so it can be easily changed later.

https://www.verum.com/dezyne/